ELISABETTA MORI: Welcome to FOSSDA, the Free and Open Source Stories Digital Archive Foundation. It's the 25th of July, 2023, and I am Elisabetta Mori, an historian of Computing currently based in Italy, and an oral history interview with FOSSDA. Today I'll be talking to Cat Allman. Cat has been involved in open source software since the 1980s and worked with the global free and open source software community at Google. We are recording on theirstory.io and I am in Rio, Elba Island, Italy, and Cat is in San Francisco, US. Welcome, Cat. Thank you for being here today. Can you talk about your childhood?

CAT ALLMAN: Sure. I was born in Oakland, in Oakland, California, in 1958, and raised in the East Bay Hills, looking out across San Francisco Bay to the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco with my older brother Eric Allman, creator, original creator of Send Mail, the mail transfer agent. Went to public schools, ending up at University of California, Santa Cruz, where I studied American Studies, so not engineering, not computer science. Growing up with an older brother who was a science child prodigy put me on another path for a while, though because of his interests we grew up with like boxes of punch cards, which it turns out if you make a cone out of them and staple them and spray paint them gold, you can make a Christmas wreath out of them, which we did do because super nerdy, what can I say? Fast forward to out of school looking for a job and that was the early 1980s and computers were just coming online as business tools. It was right before personal computers, so many computers were the rage and I was working for a advertising media planning firm that not only specialized in technology clients, but was one of the first to have a computerized, essentially, work tracking system. So whether I wanted to or not, there I was working with computers. In the meantime, I was close as I always have been with my brother and his group of friends.

CAT ALLMAN: Fast forward a little bit and my first job with free and open source software was at Mt Xinu. Mt Xinu is Unix trademark backwards. Our logo was a little mountain range. I was a contractor, not an employee, but so I was working on coordinating the company's involvement with DECUS, which was the DEC User Group Conference. And found myself really kind of engaged with the political idea of software that had been created at a publicly funded institution as being free and available to the rest of us to use. Really the academic method of, you know, you come up with an idea and other people build on it and civilization rolls along. There's a lot more history behind that, including a protracted intellectual property lawsuit between AT&T and the University of California, because Mt Xinu was selling the first commercially supported release of what is now known as Berkeley Unix. But the other thing that happened, that was a collective. So every Wednesday, we gathered in the conference room and argued every decision to a halt. And there was the one guy who gave up last, so he usually got his way. And then we had burritos, because it was California.

CAT ALLMAN: But I was a contractor, so then I was out of work again and ended up working at Axion Design. At the time it was called DeVito and Associates and it was one of the most prominent package design and branding firms in the United States. And it was all done on paper. I was running a darkroom and literally mixing bottles of ink to make custom materials for the artists to make mock-ups of package designs. But right about that time, computers started coming along in the design industry. And I already had experience using a computer which no one except the COO had and so we started expanding the offerings, the internal offerings to include computers not free and open source software but software. That rolled along, ended up being an IT manager back in the days when you could actually make a profit by selling computer services. Now it would be like having pay toilets, but at the time you could charge by, I think we charged on five minute increments for the designers using the computers that I bought and managed to do graphic design work.

ELISABETTA MORI: Do you remember computers were at the time?

CAT ALLMAN: Originally we just had one Microsoft AT, PC AT. It was actually pre-Windows, So it was command line, but just barely. And then the Macintosh came along and we started right about the time you started having color available on the Macintosh. A friend had lent me the original Macintosh. So early on, I was able to connect to a deck of backs at the University of California to send email back and forth with my friends. Kind of open source. I should mention all this predates the development of the term free software as popularized by Richard Stallman, or open source. The term open source came later in the late 1990s. So, looping that all together, how did I get started actually in free and open source software? I was sick of my job, but I liked engineers. I really admired not just the way my brother and his friends organized the world, but the people I met through the software industry in the graphic design field actually tried to put together a community in the San Francisco Bay Area for people doing IT management for advertising and graphic design. It didn't really go anywhere but it was interesting to try. So about this time the idea of businesses based on free and open source software started percolating around. I mean, there'd been, what were they called? There had been an earlier company doing BSD, CD ROMs, etc. I'm embarrassed I can't remember their name, but anyway, they were there. So my brother around that time, that would be 1997, had a former colleague who they were talking together about doing something with Sendmail in terms of starting a business around it. My brother wouldn't hire me because nepotism, he's a very principled guy, so I started harassing his business partner to give me a job as they were putting this idea of a company together. And he finally gave up and hired me. So I was employee number five at Sendmail Inc. And was there when we launched the company, which I look back on it, and it was kind of embarrassing, some of the choices I had made, but it was a really heady time. At that point, we were going to ISP-focused conferences, as that was really a stronghold for the use of free and open source software, was the ISP business, back when people could start a local ISP and actually end up making money. It didn't last long, but it was kind of glorious while it lasted.

CAT ALLMAN: And then about that same time, 1998, I think, yes, I have the t-shirt. O'Reilly and Company, the media people, the animal books, did a, as I recall it, it was an evening event at a conference room at Stanford University about free and open source software. I should have brought the t-shirt to the interview. And we were there for that. And suddenly the world was in a dot-com bubble, and not just a dot-com bubble, but a hybrid business model, open source software bubble. We actually got landed on the front page of the New York Times when we launched the company, which was pretty heady for the five of us, but the technology reporter at the time understood the importance of what Sendmail has done to actually create the Internet. And also by that time, Tim Berners-Lee had invented the World Wide Web. It's funny looking back on, I remember bringing my original Macintosh to my office and showing my boss email and he was like, why would anybody want to use this? And then some years later we brought a color Macintosh in and showed him the World Wide Web and he was like, why would anyone care? Well, needless to say, 30, 40 years, things are a little different. And I think, you know, for the regular user, they don't necessarily understand or need to understand how important FLOSS has been to the development of the Internet and the World Wide Web.

CAT ALLMAN: But as I said to a fellow panelist actually at Maker Faire Rome, a banking guy who was saying, "oh, we don't use any open source software in my Italian bank." And I'm like, "do you send email to clients bank online?" He's like, "well, yeah." I'm like, "you look, you're using free and open source software." And the look of horror on the poor man's face was really fun. But anyway, so that was interesting being in the dot-com bubble. Heady times, stupid parties. But what was really important for the development of my engagement was, I mean, I started out as the marketing manager, but as we grew, I did not maintain that title, but I was the one that got all the email coming into info at and sorted it out and answered a lot of questions and redirected people where they needed to go. Now that was mail coming into the company as a hybrid business model, we had Sendmail the projects and mail.org and Sendmail.com the company. So I was dealing with the company email and it was it was interesting times. People are very passionate about software that they work on. And Frankly, that passion is a big part of why I've stayed involved with free and open source software over the decades.

CAT ALLMAN: I never want to be in one of those jobs where people don't care. And so far, at least, people involved with free and open source really care. And that means, I mean, life is short and you don't have time at work. So you might as well spend it with people. Even if you don't always agree with them, you respect their commitment to their ideas. So here I am. Plus, I like solving problems and free software, open source software, it's all about solving problems and working collectively to make things better for all of us. Sometimes not so much together. There's the XKCD comic of the enormous infrastructure that holds up the world and there's one little block at the bottom maintained by one guy. But that's another interesting thing is the sustainability of free and open source software as it is increasingly relied upon by the world, really the global infrastructure of information.

CAT ALLMAN: So fast forward, I worked at Send Mail for about four years and I took some time off and the USENIX Association is something that I had known for a long time. When I was an IT manager I went to their conferences focused on IT services and I knew the executive director and people involved. My brother and my brother-in-law had been involved. So when the executive director called me and asked me to come in and do what amounted to fundraising, marketing and fundraising for them, I was ready for another job. So I worked there for years. But one of our sponsors, I was about to call them a client because they were kind of a client, was Google, early Google. And my brother had told me about this cool new search engine in 1999 I think and then I remember really wanting a Gmail email address even though a friend was running my own domain for me. So Google recruiting had booths and advertisements on the Unix platform, Usenix platform. I'll be careful to pronounce that right. So I knew some people there. And then someone I knew from the dot com bubble when he was at VA Linux was now the head of Google's OSPO. People argue whether Google had the first OSPO or whether Sun Microsystems did. I don't know that it really matters, but if you want to have a heated conversation in a bar late at night, at certain circumstances, you can bring that up. So, actually the first job I applied to at Google they wouldn't even talk to me which was disappointing, but c'est la vie. But then I saw Chris DeBona at an open source conference and one of the people working at Google had made a unfortunate error in something they were doing and I had been able to correct it for them before it got bad. So I was aware that there might be a need there for help with working with the free and open source software community. So I saw Chris and I'm like, "hey, Chris, need any help?" And he said, "Yeah, why don't you apply?" So you asked me about interviews, it took four months. And three rounds of interviews, I think I interviewed with eight people. And my recruiter was funny after I was hired. She said, "you know, Google staffing didn't even want to give you a phone screen." I'm like, okay. But the free and open source software community takes care of its own, if you will. Not only Chris went and said, "no, really, you have to hire her", but a gentleman named Rob Pike, who had been involved with the Unix operating system since the 1980s, and more recently was the original creator of the Go system. When you apply to Google, at least it used to be, they would send an email around internally saying, do you know this person? Because you have to put a list of people you know working at Google on your application. So Rob said something really nice for me. And since Rob had been at Bell Labs and was generally very well respected, I told him I'd make him some brownies and he's like, no, it's my job. Rob's kind of like that.

CAT ALLMAN: So they eventually broke down and hired me. And yeah, it was very exciting to try working at a big company. I have to say my first day was spent in a windowless room in a group for an orientation with all these extraordinarily perky videos. And I went home in tears because I thought oh my god I've made a terrible mistake. But unlike most people at least at the time who applied to Google I went into it knowing who I was going to work for and what I was going to work on. I didn't go to work at Google, I went to work on free and open source software at Google. So that's what I did. It's part of the outreach team. So we did things like, Google Summer of Code came from there, as well as Google Code-In, which was a program like Google Summer of Code, but for teenagers, which was actually even more inspiring, I think, than Google Summer of Code. I should mention in case it's not clear, Google Summer of Code is a program that Google has been running since 2005, where they work, open source projects can apply to be mentoring organizations for a period of months, where they will accept, used to be students, now it can be anybody, to work on their projects, Google supplies a stipend for the contributor, they're called now, they used to be called students, now they're called contributors, to work with that project directly on pre-agreed upon projects to benefit that project.

CAT ALLMAN: Ultimately, as I know the origin story, Google Summer of Code came about because Larry Page came up behind Chris DeBona, Larry Page being one of Google's founders, came up behind Chris DeBona, the head of the open source programs office, and said, it seems like people, students are losing their skills over the summer working non-computer related jobs fixed that. And Chris being Chris saw it as an opportunity to get more people contributing to free and open source software. So that's what he did. He designed a program that addressed Larry's concerns while pulling more people into the free and open source software movement and getting projects that were interested in mentoring new contributors some help getting those people engaged. It's still going on. I'm trying to think. Last time I ran the numbers, which was a few years ago, we had worked with over 650 projects from around the world and many thousands not only of students but mentors. I have to say it's one of the things I'm really proud of having been able to support in any way. It's, you meet all kinds of people working in our funny little ecosystem and working on GSoC gave me the opportunity to meet a heck of a lot of them, which I really cherish that. I was always kind of envious that my brother and his friends working in computer science got to travel and knew people all over the world and had this pretty vast network of friends and colleagues. And by working on Summer of Code in particular, I got to have that too. And I got to travel, woo, which I really wanted to do. We did a certain amount of outreach to encourage more participation, particularly in underrepresented areas, so I've had the opportunity to speak at engineering schools in Singapore and Cambodia, Vietnam, Germany, India, let's see, Taiwan, a bunch of places. It's still haven't gotten to South America, that's very disappointing.

CAT ALLMAN: But I did get to Australia and New Zealand quite a bit, which was wonderful. That I mean, aside from the fact that open source drives the global economy by providing the underlying infrastructure for computer services. The global network of people engaged in this is incredibly important to me, and not just because I'm talking to somebody who's in Italy right now, but there's a lot of divisiveness in the world right now. And I'm not saying everything in free and open source software is all kittens and rainbows because there are some fairly extreme personalities involved. But overall, what I hear from people, past participants in GSoC, is that participating in open source has expanded their knowledge of the world, be it coming from a secondary engineering school in Sri Lanka and ending up in a PhD program in the United States or simply having the opportunity to work with people who are clear around the world from them. And it can't be discounted that as the awareness for free and open source software in industry has grown, it is participating in FLOSS is increasingly a requirement to get a job.

CAT ALLMAN: So there's the economic opportunity, which is something I used to talk about at engineering schools in places like Phnom Penh. The engineering school I spoke at there didn't have glass in the windows, but they did have computers and wonderfully optimistic and hungry population of students who wanted to make their lives better and the lives of their families better and open source gave them a way to do that. So I feel very privileged to have been a part of it in any way. And since I mentioned any way, I should bring up alternative forms of contribution. I was reluctant to do this interview because in a lot of ways I still feel like I'm not a real FLOSS contributor because I don't code. I mean, I noodled around with PostScript back in the day, but I'm not a coder, nor do I have formal engineering training. So I've always felt like an imposter. At the same time, something that has been wonderful to see over the last 30-ish years is, 30, 25, 25 years, is the growing appreciation for non-code contributions. People coming to appreciate that they're not just nice to have, like, oh, somebody got us coffee, but critical to have, be it raising money so that people have the equipment and bandwidth they need. Thank God people are figuring out documentation. But also the community building, which is really where I find myself really focused. The past several years I've been focused on a conference that I'm deeply proud to be a contributor to as a co-organizer called Science Foo Camp with O'Reilly Media. The Foo stands for Friends of O'Reilly. Nature, the scientific publishing company, and Digital Science, which is a company in the same media group as Nature that builds digital tools to aid scientific research. It's an interdisciplinary conference where we invite people from up and down the career stack and all across the spectrum of the sciences to come together for an unconference. An unconference being essentially the hallway track, all those fascinating, weird conversations you have in the hallways and over meals at conferences. An unconference gives you the opportunity to focus the entire event on those kinds of conversations, what people are thinking about now, what they're maybe planning to do and want feedback on.

CAT ALLMAN: So I've been working on this conference, SciFu as we call it, since 2007 when I started at Google. Because back then my manager at the time, not Chris, didn't, she wanted to focus more specifically on software. And the concept of open science, open data, open hardware to a lesser extent was really new. And so I stepped in to get to be Google's lead on it, which I really enjoy, and I am continuing to do that to this day, including creating an alumni community for past participants in the conference. So it ranges far afield from strictly open source, open science, etc. But increasingly, you can't do science without computers. I mean, you still, there's the natural world and reagents and lab equipment, et cetera, and computers are ubiquitous. And increasingly people are appreciating, especially in the US, as budgets for academic research are increasingly not keeping pace with inflation. The opportunity to use free and open source software in place of commercial programs is increasingly important. And, for example, the Carpentries, which you may have heard of, was a participant in the ESOC a number of times. One of my favorite projects because it is a program that pulls together volunteer-driven workshops at universities and research institutions, not just in the US but around the world, to teach researchers the basics of using free and open source software to accomplish their research. So it's kind of a, I don't want to call it a gateway drug because that sounds nefarious, but It does, again, pull more people into the ecosystem and benefits science, which I think benefits us all. And I've been talking nonstop and not giving you a chance to ask any questions. So hit me.

ELISABETTA MORI: That's fine. So what do you think are the challenges and opportunities that you built, the impact you had on building these communities?

CAT ALLMAN: Ah, well, while I was helping with- speaking about Google, I actually had a job job in addition to managing the team at one point, teams at the same time. But anyway, my job "job" was choosing projects to provide sponsorship money to and getting that money out to them, largely for events, but also direct sponsorships of open source projects and organizations. Which I gotta say, as jobs go, having been on the other side of the desk, asking for money for a nonprofit, getting to give money to nonprofits is rather enjoyable, especially by comparison. It's really satisfying to know that you can, I shouldn't say this, but I'm going to use Google's money to support something I believe in? Also, because a lot of sponsorships coming from commercial organizations to FLOSS projects are earmarked specifically there to sponsor conferences where people get marketing exposure, or if it's not event-related or program-related, it tends to be tied to a specific development effort. When I was doing it, I always tried as much as possible to make it an unsecured sponsorship, so that the projects could use it for unglamorous things like bandwidths and paying people to do the kind of work that companies don't want to pay for and that volunteers aren't interested in doing, doing the grunge work. All the overhead stuff that people don't realize exists because, hey, it's free software, it's all free, right? Not so much really. Back in the day, you had to pay your ISP bill. Now, you may have cloud services bills, you may need new hardware, you may want to bring your developers together from time to time physically to brainstorm your roadmap for the next year. So lots of things to think about, actually.

CAT ALLMAN: Challenges going forward to the FLOSS ecosystem. Something that I'm really concerned about, And I'm conflicted about it is, FLOSS is one of those 20 plus year overnight successes. It's been around a long time, but it's only now that people, businesses are appreciating how essential it is. At the same time, they still want the code for free. I mean, lots of businesses like Google are understanding the importance of working with projects so that they are sustainable, they have the economic and other resources that they need to continue. But what I worry about is the psychological aspects. Back when free and open source software was done by people who cared passionately about it. I mean, back in the day, people didn't go into computer science because, oh, I'm going to get rich. They would go to law school or something like that. They would get a business degree. But now, computer science is seen as a safe way to make a good living. Nothing wrong with that, but FLOSS has been a volunteer ecosystem, and when you make it a requirement to get a job, then it becomes a transactional ecosystem in a way that it wasn't before. And what I'm hearing from younger students in particular, and some older ones too, is that they want to get paid.

CAT ALLMAN: Yes, it's free software, but they don't want to do the development work unless they are getting paid. Corporations are making large sums of money on the backs of people who have done it for love. And at this point, they want to get paid. And who can blame them? It's almost like free and open source software development is that extra job that theoretically women have. You know they work all day and then they come home and they've got their second job in the home. Well, now people have their day job and then they come home and they code at night. And I really see that volunteer flywheel breaking down, so much so that I'm really worried about it, actually, that if people stop volunteering, that the licensing structure won't hold. Also as you have companies who start out as free and open source software hybrid businesses relicensing their software in such a way that it is no longer compliant with the Open Source Initiative definitions of the various licenses. And I mean, I don't know how to do that. Goodwill is not an engine. If you have to apply heat in the form of money, I don't know. I don't know that the center is going to hold and that the system is going to hold up. I worry that in about five years it's all going to have broken down, which would be a shame.

CAT ALLMAN: I mean, on the one hand, everything has a life cycle and the wheel turns and that's just what happens, but I would really hate to see the force of innovation in community that FLOSS has been for me and my network of friends die. I don't know how we fix this. I don't know how we, what I don't want to have happen is that people in under-resourced countries continue to participate in free and open source software as a way to make some money and potentially move to a higher resourced area, but that becomes a kind of digital serfdom, and I really don't want to see that happen. More than it already is with data sets for large learning models, but that's another thing. So that's my concern and I don't know what's going to happen. It's been interesting to watch. It seems increasingly like there is a movement in the United States to discontinue open source programs offices and take the compliance, license compliance and other aspects that are generally managed by OSPOs and spread them out so that the compliance goes to legal and the sponsorship for sustainability goes to marketing and again I would hate to see that happen because having, we'll say, pushed back against various marketing teams over several decades, I think that has the potential to exacerbate the shift from volunteerism and really altruism and in, well, I'll call it altruism, call it enlightened self-interest of participating in free and open source to a strictly commercial relationship. But I hope I'm just being pessimistic. We'll see. Oh, dear. I hope we're not frozen.

ELISABETTA MORI: Okay, sorry, I'm going to rephrase. So, what activities have you pursued since you left Google?

CAT ALLMAN: Ah, well, I honestly thought when I got laid off from Google that the boards I was on would ask me to step down so they could get another Google person. But I'm happy to say that in both cases, they were like, actually all three cases, they were like, "no, no, we want you, not the company." So that's good. In fact, the IEEE one wanted me to be vice chair. So I'm doing that.

ELISABETTA MORI: Can you name these boards?

CAT ALLMAN: Sure. Committee for the, God it's so long, the digital testbed out of universities in Oregon and British Columbia. And apologies to John Fink, who's rolling his eyes at me right now, one moment.

ELISABETTA MORI: Okay, Digital Testbed Center Advisory Board.

CAT ALLMAN: Let me get this important, and maybe you can edit it for me.

ELISABETTA MORI: I lost you.

CAT ALLMAN: Portland State University Digital Cities Test FreeBSD Foundation Board and the committee for IEEE Standards Association Open Source Committee, OSCON, are the official boards I'm on. I'm also, my main thing I've been working on is, I've been contracting with digital science out of the UK to help land that while working closely not only with O'Reilly and nature but also Google because when they laid me off they didn't cancel the program, they just laid off the only person working on it. And I knew the person that they drafted to pick up my work, and I wasn't just going to leave her twisting in the wind. An event came down the weekend before last, mid-July, excuse me. And we are already deep in conversation about 2024.

CAT ALLMAN: People have given me grief for when I'm not getting paid, at least not as much as I was. But the truth is, I really love what I do. And I'm not going to stop. The great thing is it's not a Google program so Google legal can't make me stop. Plus it looks like I'm going to be working for digital science as an employee to continue not only the conference itself, looks like we're gonna be doing it at Cambridge University next summer, which I'm super excited about. I mean, Cambridge, but also the alumni community. It's not large, but with a thousand opinionated people, it's sometimes a handful. But obviously during COVID, we talked about COVID and vaccine science. Right now we're talking about AI because the world is talking about AI, but lots of other things going on. And it's pretty heady when somebody talks about public health to have someone like Larry Brilliant, who was on the team that ended smallpox, chime in. Or Vint Cerf, arguably the father of the internet, will pop in and always ask, I love, his messages are always very brief. There's that old saying, it's, I would have written a short, I didn't have time to write a short message, so I wrote a long one. Vint writes short messages because he's just that smart, which is really fun to watch. So yeah, that's what I'm doing. FreeBSD project, we're working with Core. The project is run, there's the foundation, the nonprofit that provides essentially support services, etc. For the project, which is managed by kind of an elected group of people called core, and they're the technical people that are doing the technical work. And collectively, we're trying to work more closely together so that we can coordinate our efforts to make everything better. Not that things are bad, but just making it better.

ELISABETTA MORI: So if you look at your career, is there anything you would do differently if you had your time again? And why?

CAT ALLMAN: If I could start over in junior high school now, I would have been less of a visible nerd, more of a stealth nerd, and probably gone into the biological sciences in some respects. But the truth is, I don't want to do over because I love my life. People are wonderful. I mean, not everybody. I mean, I live in America. People suck sometimes, but the community that I have found in free and open source software, it's a wonderful thing with a really interesting group of people. And I can be as nerdy as I want to be, which makes me very happy. And I can feel like in whatever small way I'm contributing to making the world better, which matters to me. I hope it matters to a lot of people. I think it matters to more than the average percent of people in the FLOSS world, which once again, here I am. So.

ELISABETTA MORI: So is there a project you're particularly proud of or what is your proudest achievement?

CAT ALLMAN: At the risk of sounding hopelessly vain, it's hard to pick because there are several. Being involved with Google Summer of Code was such a blessing. I wasn't as involved with Google Code in the high school program, but it was really inspiring and reassuring to meet kids, I can call them kids because they're under 18, from all over the world that were just that smart and that passionate about what they were doing. In terms of funding, at one point we had spun up a team inside Google called Making in Science, specifically addressing DOI, Making in Science, or more specifically STEM education. At one point I had money left over in a budget there, so there's the WikiEDU project, which is a spin-out of the Wikimedia Foundation, where they have a program working with professors to have students learn how to, to Wikipedia, improving their science skills and also so that writing term papers that end up in their parents' basement, they write Wikipedia articles increasing the amount of knowledge available to us all. In one month, they did a year of science with a specific focus on increasing content in Wikipedia about women in science, in one month alone, that content increased by, I forget if it was 7 or 14%. And when you think about the impact of just that much more knowledge about the importance of women in science, I am really proud about having been able to provide financial support for that effort.

ELISABETTA MORI: So talking about diversity in the computer science industry, what are your thoughts for the future?

CAT ALLMAN: Well, Back in the 80s when I got involved with this, yes, there were still more men than women, but there were a lot of women in the academic setting. I knew a number of female professors and contributors. So I didn't really see it as an issue, but then as computer science became more business focused and more people studied for the career opportunities rather than passion, that number decreased. And it took me a while to notice, really, because I would go to conferences in the 90s, and people would say, "oh, women are in open source. I'm like, what are you talking about? This person and that person. Then I realized those ladies are retiring and they're not necessarily being replaced by female professors. So there was an issue and yes, at one point I was at a conference about C++. And I looked around the room and I realized out of 50 people, I was the only woman. And then a guy said something about making him a sandwich. I was like, "oh, okay, that's what they were talking about. Got it." And I tell friends of mine in other industries, some of the stories of what it was like in the 80s and what it was like. Because there was definitely a boys club and not just a lack of respect, but disrespect towards people in non-coding world. And the assumption that if you were female, you were not able to code and therefore not good at coding.

CAT ALLMAN: And I hadn't realized how much I had internalized that, but yeah. I'm delighted to say it isn't applied equally globally. For example, I went to give a talk about Summer of Code at a university in Oman in the Middle East. Before I agreed to go, I looked and the enrollment in the computer science department at that university skewed female. There were more women in the computer science department than there were men. So even though I went to this university where the women were all fully covered up except for their hands and their faces, not only were the majority of the students female, but the students who were most engaged and passionate about free and open source software specifically were all women. And my understanding is that that is, it's in places where, well I'm not going to say that, but long story short, sorry for rambling. I think the potential is there for it to be better. I think as with American politics, we are seeing a backlash as people see women coming in and not just women but underrepresented groups coming in see that as a loss of privilege rather than as an expansion of opportunity for everyone. But maybe the increasing ubiquity of FLOSS will address some of this, because the upside of market forces is it's harder to be a jerk if there's money on the table. So except if, well, maybe that's true. Actually, I'm second guessing myself. I would like that it's going to get better. One thing I have noticed in the past is some of our students, particularly the high school students, they tell me about how the educational system in their country is modeled in such a way that, what's the word, individual initiative is discouraged rather than encouraged. I would argue that one reason why FLOSS has been as centered as it has been in the US and Western Europe is because the education system provides more opportunity for students to pursue things they're interested in rather than in following a strict, largely focused on memorization of existing content. That's just my feeling, I have no facts to back this up, so don't quote me, but yeah, I don't know what's going to happen there. It'll be interesting. It'll be interesting to see what happens with China, though the downside of trying to look to China to see a rise of open-source software is the difficulties with licenses and license compliance, but that's a story for lawyers.

ELISABETTA MORI: What advice would you give to someone that might want to pursue your career?

CAT ALLMAN: Be brave, be humble, but don't doubt yourself. If imposter syndrome were fatal, I would be dead. So trust yourself. Trust yourself and enjoy yourself and pick your battles. If you get angry about every little thing, you're gonna be angry a lot and that's a waste of time and energy. On the other hand, don't let people... regulate accounts. Yeah, I have to say the world has gotten better. And it's hard to recognize that when it's happening to you. But I like to tell people, some of my colleagues, that for example, when I started working out of college, help wanted ads were segregated by gender. You couldn't even apply to certain jobs if you were female. I was in a session at a conference about diversity and equity and going around the room and people sharing their concerns and one person was very upset about people using the word guys as an inclusive pronoun. Hey guys, we're going to go to... they felt very excluded by this. And then it was my turn and I talked about the time I was in a staff meeting at the design firm and the senior most designer announced her pregnancy and the CEO of the company looked at her and said, "well you are going to get an abortion aren't you?" Things are better now. Things are. It's hard to see and they're not necessarily great, but they are better. And so don't lose hope, even though there are times when you want to wring people's necks.

ELISABETTA MORI: Is there anything you would like to add that we haven't covered today?

CAT ALLMAN: Well I pontificated at length. So just to follow your passions. At Maker Faires past, Google had a booth where we displayed people's personal projects as well as prototypes for things like early Google Glass, etc. And I would bring hyperbolic crochet, which you might say, what the heck is hyperbolic crochet? Well, it is crochet that models fractal equations in yarn. It was originally hit upon by a math professor I think at the University of Chicago when she realized that her students couldn't visualize the results of fractal equations, and that then she figured out that crochet would be the perfect way to build physical models of these rates of growth. And from this, then two sisters, the Wertheim Sisters, started the Institute for Figuring, talking about the intersection between handcrafts and mathematics.

CAT ALLMAN: So it's both a woman's studies project and a science project and a citizen science project. It's all over the world, including the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C. There are assembled reefs, because coral reef, as in the ocean, as well as various kinds of plants, waterways, much of life, grow in fractals, these repeating patterns of growth. So, I crochet them out of nice soft squishy yarn and send them in and they're assembled into these art projects. The most recent one I believe was in Hamburg. Beautiful stuff. So I bring this up because at the Maker Faire there's soldering, and there's robots, and there's stuff that's on fire. And I had a probably three times size model of the human cerebellum in crochet. So there was this big fuzzy squishy object and not all women or little girls but sometimes other people would come through with their eyes glazed because they were tired of electronics and they would see yarn and they would get very excited. You could explain how it's like plants grow, it's the way galaxies grow, you can make it yourself, it's really easy and it's really impressive looking and it's soft and squishy. So it's not coding. It's the simplest kind of math, but it's something that I really enjoy, and through it I was able to convince at least a handful of people that math isn't all scary. So do what you enjoy because life is short and you might as well have fun.

ELISABETTA MORI: Thank you Cat. It's been a real pleasure talking to you today. Thank you.

CAT ALLMAN: Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to pontificate.

ELISABETTA MORI: Thank you.